tests/integration/README.md, before:

# Integration tests for Cachito

This directory stores the integration tests for Cachito.

## Configuration

Input data for tests should be configured in the file `test_env_vars.yaml`. The file should be placed in top-level 
directory of this repository. The path can be changed by setting `CACHITO_TEST_CONFIG` to a different path.

See `tests/integration/example_test_env_vars.yaml` for a complete list of configuration options and examples.

## Running the tests

Tests can be triggered from the top-level directory of this repository with:

    tox -e integration

The integration environment is not part of the default `tox` envlist.

`REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE` can be passed in `tox.ini` for the `integration`
environment in order to enable running the tests against Cachito instances which
have certificates issued by a custom root certificate authority. Example usage:

    REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE=/etc/pki/tls/certs/ca-bundle.crt tox -e integration

`KRB5CCNAME` can be passed in `tox.ini` for the `integration`
environment when using Kerberos authentication in requests.

Commit message:

Update integration tests README to point to the correct test env config file

tests/integration/README.md, after:

# Integration tests for Cachito

This directory stores the integration tests for Cachito.

## Configuration

Input data for tests should be configured in the file `test_env_vars.yaml`. The file should be placed in top-level 
directory of this repository. The path can be changed by setting `CACHITO_TEST_CONFIG` to a different path.

See `test_env_vars.yaml` for a complete list of configuration options and examples at the top-level directory of this repo.

## Running the tests

Tests can be triggered from the top-level directory of this repository with:

    tox -e integration

The integration environment is not part of the default `tox` envlist.

`REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE` can be passed in `tox.ini` for the `integration`
environment in order to enable running the tests against Cachito instances which
have certificates issued by a custom root certificate authority. Example usage:

    REQUESTS_CA_BUNDLE=/etc/pki/tls/certs/ca-bundle.crt tox -e integration

`KRB5CCNAME` can be passed in `tox.ini` for the `integration`
environment when using Kerberos authentication in requests.
