docs/pip.md, before:

# Pip

> :warning: Cachito's way of supporting Git and HTTP(S) dependencies is currently only compatible
> with `pip >= 10.0`

This document describes some of the more intricate details of Cachito support for pip. For a high
level overview, look [here in the README](../README.md#pip).

Cachito has a number of specific requirements when it comes to pip packages. Some of those stem from
the general ideas behind Cachito (e.g. reproducibility), some from the technical challenges of
supporting a packaging system which defines most metadata through a Python executable. Read on for
more details.

## requirements.txt

One of the main component of a pip package is the `requirements.txt` file. Typically, the file might
look something like this:

```ini
requests
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip
```

The dependencies in this file are:

* `requests`, a PyPI dependency
* `dockerfile-parse`, a Git dependency
* `operator-manifest`, an HTTPS dependency

Git and HTTP(S) dependencies will henceforth collectively be referred to as "external."

### Pinning versions

To make sure builds are reproducible, Cachito will require that all dependencies be pinned to
a specific version.

For PyPI dependencies, use the `==` operator:

```
requests==2.24.0
```

For Git dependencies, specify the commit hash:

```
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse@<full-commit-hash>
```

For HTTP(S) dependencies, include the hash of the source archive using `#cachito_hash`:

```
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip#cachito_hash=sha256:<full-sha-digest>
```

### Specifying dependencies

In addition to specifying direct dependencies, recursive dependencies also need to be explicitly
defined for two reasons:

1. Further enable reproducibility by explicitly specifying _every_ needed package
2. Prevent the need for remote execution of `setup.py`

#### pip-compile

While this might be onerous to manually maintain, `pip-compile` from
[pip-tools](https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools) can be used to automate this process for you
using the following procedure.

1. rename `requirements.txt` to `requirements.in` (by convention)
2. run `pip-compile requirements.in -o requirements.txt`

This is the output of the above command:

```ini
#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile
# To update, run:
#
#    pip-compile --output-file=requirements.txt requirements.in
#
certifi==2020.6.20        # via requests
chardet==3.0.4            # via requests
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse  # via -r requirements.in
idna==2.10                # via requests
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip  # via -r requirements.in
requests==2.24.0          # via -r requirements.in
ruamel.yaml.clib==0.2.2   # via ruamel.yaml
ruamel.yaml==0.16.12      # via operator-manifest
six==1.15.0               # via dockerfile-parse
urllib3==1.25.10          # via requests
```

As you can see, `pip-compile` gathered all the recursive dependencies and pinned all PyPI packages.
It did not pin external dependencies, the mechanism for doing so is specific to Cachito. You can pin
these beforehand in the `requirements.in` file, but if any of the recursive dependencies are
external, you may need to edit the generated file anyway.

Note that `pip-compile` considers some packages "unsafe" in a requirements file (e.g. `setuptools`).
If you do use these packages as runtime dependencies, you will need to pass the `--allow-unsafe`
flag to `pip-compile`. If you only use them as build time dependencies, you will need to put them
in a separate requirements file as described in [Build dependencies](#build-dependencies).

### Explicit package names

Cachito needs to know the package name for all of your dependencies. For PyPI dependencies, this is
trivial, as the name is already present in the requirements file. For external dependencies,
resolving the name may require executing the `setup.py` file. Cachito does have a mechanism for
extracting package metadata from `setup.py`, but it is very limited. That is why, for external
dependencies, you will need to explicitly specify package names using one of the mechanisms that
pip supports.

a) use `@`:

```
<package-name> @ git+https://github.com/namespace/repo
```

b) use `#egg`:

```
git+https://github.com/namespace/repo#egg=<package-name>
```

Similarly to the procedure used for pinning external dependency versions, you can specify explicit
package names in `requirements.in` to avoid having to edit the file generated by `pip-compile`.
However, `pip-compile` seems to ignore the `@` mechanism, so using `#egg` may be preferrable.

After pinning versions and specifying package names for external dependencies, the `requirements.in`
file at the [top of this section](#requirementstxt) would look like this:

```ini
requests==2.24.0
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse@<full-commit-hash>#egg=dockerfile-parse
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip#egg=operator-manifest&cachito_hash=sha256:<full-sha-digest>
```

### Hash checking

In general, Cachito handles hash checking the same way that pip does. If `--require-hashes` is
present in the requirements file, or if any dependency uses the `--hash` option, Cachito will
require that all dependencies specify a hash and will check that the hashes are valid.

For HTTP(S) dependencies, Cachito will always require a hash and will always validate it. You can
provide it using `--hash`, but as mentioned above, that will turn on hash checking for *all* your
dependencies. If that is not desirable, use the Cachito-specific `#cachito_hash` URL fragment as
shown in the HTTP(S) dependencies example in the [Pinning versions](#pinning-versions) section.

### Build dependencies

Setuptools provides a way to specify build dependencies via the [setup_requires][setuptools-docs]
keyword argument. It is deprecated in favor of the [PEP-518][pep-518] approach but, for similar
reasons as mentioned in the sections above, Cachito supports neither. If you have any build-only
dependencies, you will need to put them in a `requirements-build.txt` file which follows the same
rules as `requirements.txt`.

There are two implications which may not be immediately obvious for build requirements files:

1. you need to specify all the runtime _and_ build dependencies for each direct build dependency
   (recursively)
2. you need to repeat the above for _all_ your recursive runtime dependencies

Some of this can be achieved by pip-compiling a file containing your direct build dependencies,
but in some cases, manual updates may be required.

In practice, most build dependencies should have few dependencies of their own (if any) and the
build dependencies of your runtime dependencies should mostly overlap, so you will often end up
with `setuptools` and `wheel` as your only build dependencies.

When building your app using the Cachito-provided content, you will need to make sure build
dependencies are installed before runtime dependencies. If you use a packaging system, specify
all the build dependencies in the proper location (e.g. `options.setup_requires` in `setup.cfg` or
`build_system.requires` in `pyproject.toml`). If you do not, make sure to `pip install` the build
requirements file(s) before the runtime requirements file(s).

## setup.py, setup.cfg

Pip packages can define their metadata in two files -- [setup.py][setup-py-docs] or
[setup.cfg][setup-cfg-docs] (or a combination of the two). Cachito will scan both of these files
(if present) for the name and version of your package. If Cachito fails to resolve either of those
values, the request will fail. More details about how (and to what extent) Cachito supports setup
files can be found in the docstrings of the corresponding classes in [pip.py][cachito-pip-py]:
`SetupPY`, `SetupCFG`.

Support for `setup.cfg` is more complete and allows greater flexibility when defining the package
version compared to `setup.py`. Nevertheless, both approaches are subject to some compromises on the
Cachito side. If Cachito cannot resolve the metadata it needs, you may unfortunately need to make
changes in your packaging code.

## User configuration

Cachito allows you to configure some aspects of a request that uses the `pip` package manager. You
can specify multiple subpackages within the source repository. For each subpackage, you can specify
custom locations for your requirements and build requirements file(s). Below is an example request
that uses all the available configuration options.

```json
{
  "repo": "https://github.com/example/repo.git",
  "ref": "8adec82cf2fc557d23a6dac2563ed25bb0f46b72",
  "pkg_managers": ["pip"],
  "packages": {
    "pip": [
      {
        "path": ".",
        "requirements_files": ["requirements.txt", "requirements-extras.txt"]
      },
      {
        "path": "some/subpackage",
        "build_requirements_files": ["requirements-build-only.txt"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

[setuptools-docs]: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html
[pep-518]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0518/
[setup-py-docs]: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#basic-use
[setup-cfg-docs]: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#configuring-setup-using-setup-cfg-files
[cachito-pip-py]: ../cachito/workers/pkg_managers/pip.py

Commit message:

Mention script for finding builddeps in docs
Signed-off-by: Adam Cmiel <acmiel@redhat.com>

docs/pip.md, after:

# Pip

> :warning: Cachito's way of supporting Git and HTTP(S) dependencies is currently only compatible
> with `pip >= 10.0`

This document describes some of the more intricate details of Cachito support for pip. For a high
level overview, look [here in the README](../README.md#pip).

Cachito has a number of specific requirements when it comes to pip packages. Some of those stem from
the general ideas behind Cachito (e.g. reproducibility), some from the technical challenges of
supporting a packaging system which defines most metadata through a Python executable. Read on for
more details.

## requirements.txt

One of the main component of a pip package is the `requirements.txt` file. Typically, the file might
look something like this:

```ini
requests
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip
```

The dependencies in this file are:

* `requests`, a PyPI dependency
* `dockerfile-parse`, a Git dependency
* `operator-manifest`, an HTTPS dependency

Git and HTTP(S) dependencies will henceforth collectively be referred to as "external."

### Pinning versions

To make sure builds are reproducible, Cachito will require that all dependencies be pinned to
a specific version.

For PyPI dependencies, use the `==` operator:

```
requests==2.24.0
```

For Git dependencies, specify the commit hash:

```
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse@<full-commit-hash>
```

For HTTP(S) dependencies, include the hash of the source archive using `#cachito_hash`:

```
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip#cachito_hash=sha256:<full-sha-digest>
```

### Specifying dependencies

In addition to specifying direct dependencies, recursive dependencies also need to be explicitly
defined for two reasons:

1. Further enable reproducibility by explicitly specifying _every_ needed package
2. Prevent the need for remote execution of `setup.py`

#### pip-compile

While this might be onerous to manually maintain, `pip-compile` from
[pip-tools](https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools) can be used to automate this process for you
using the following procedure.

1. rename `requirements.txt` to `requirements.in` (by convention)
2. run `pip-compile requirements.in -o requirements.txt`

This is the output of the above command:

```ini
#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile
# To update, run:
#
#    pip-compile --output-file=requirements.txt requirements.in
#
certifi==2020.6.20        # via requests
chardet==3.0.4            # via requests
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse  # via -r requirements.in
idna==2.10                # via requests
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip  # via -r requirements.in
requests==2.24.0          # via -r requirements.in
ruamel.yaml.clib==0.2.2   # via ruamel.yaml
ruamel.yaml==0.16.12      # via operator-manifest
six==1.15.0               # via dockerfile-parse
urllib3==1.25.10          # via requests
```

As you can see, `pip-compile` gathered all the recursive dependencies and pinned all PyPI packages.
It did not pin external dependencies, the mechanism for doing so is specific to Cachito. You can pin
these beforehand in the `requirements.in` file, but if any of the recursive dependencies are
external, you may need to edit the generated file anyway.

Note that `pip-compile` considers some packages "unsafe" in a requirements file (e.g. `setuptools`).
If you do use these packages as runtime dependencies, you will need to pass the `--allow-unsafe`
flag to `pip-compile`. If you only use them as build time dependencies, you will need to put them
in a separate requirements file as described in [Build dependencies](#build-dependencies).

### Explicit package names

Cachito needs to know the package name for all of your dependencies. For PyPI dependencies, this is
trivial, as the name is already present in the requirements file. For external dependencies,
resolving the name may require executing the `setup.py` file. Cachito does have a mechanism for
extracting package metadata from `setup.py`, but it is very limited. That is why, for external
dependencies, you will need to explicitly specify package names using one of the mechanisms that
pip supports.

a) use `@`:

```
<package-name> @ git+https://github.com/namespace/repo
```

b) use `#egg`:

```
git+https://github.com/namespace/repo#egg=<package-name>
```

Similarly to the procedure used for pinning external dependency versions, you can specify explicit
package names in `requirements.in` to avoid having to edit the file generated by `pip-compile`.
However, `pip-compile` seems to ignore the `@` mechanism, so using `#egg` may be preferrable.

After pinning versions and specifying package names for external dependencies, the `requirements.in`
file at the [top of this section](#requirementstxt) would look like this:

```ini
requests==2.24.0
git+https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/dockerfile-parse@<full-commit-hash>#egg=dockerfile-parse
https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/operator-manifest/archive/v0.0.3.zip#egg=operator-manifest&cachito_hash=sha256:<full-sha-digest>
```

### Hash checking

In general, Cachito handles hash checking the same way that pip does. If `--require-hashes` is
present in the requirements file, or if any dependency uses the `--hash` option, Cachito will
require that all dependencies specify a hash and will check that the hashes are valid.

For HTTP(S) dependencies, Cachito will always require a hash and will always validate it. You can
provide it using `--hash`, but as mentioned above, that will turn on hash checking for *all* your
dependencies. If that is not desirable, use the Cachito-specific `#cachito_hash` URL fragment as
shown in the HTTP(S) dependencies example in the [Pinning versions](#pinning-versions) section.

### Build dependencies

Setuptools provides a way to specify build dependencies via the [setup_requires][setuptools-docs]
keyword argument. It is deprecated in favor of the [PEP-518][pep-518] approach but, for similar
reasons as mentioned in the sections above, Cachito supports neither. If you have any build-only
dependencies, you will need to put them in a `requirements-build.txt` file which follows the same
rules as `requirements.txt`.

There are two implications which may not be immediately obvious for build requirements files:

1. you need to specify all the runtime _and_ build dependencies for each direct build dependency
   (recursively)
2. you need to repeat the above for _all_ your recursive runtime dependencies

You can use the [pip_find_builddeps.py](../bin/pip_find_builddeps.py) script to find all the build
dependencies you will need. Here is how you would use it:

1. set up `requirements.txt` as described [above](#specifying-dependencies)
2. if you have any direct build dependencies, put them in `requirements-build.in`
3. run `pip_find_builddeps.py requirements.txt -o requirements-build.in --append`
4. run `pip-compile requirements-build.in -o requirements-build.txt --allow-unsafe`

When building your app using the Cachito-provided content, you will need to make sure build
dependencies are installed before runtime dependencies. If you use a packaging system, specify
all the build dependencies in the proper location (e.g. `options.setup_requires` in `setup.cfg` or
`build_system.requires` in `pyproject.toml`). If you do not, make sure to `pip install` the build
requirements file(s) before the runtime requirements file(s).

## setup.py, setup.cfg

Pip packages can define their metadata in two files -- [setup.py][setup-py-docs] or
[setup.cfg][setup-cfg-docs] (or a combination of the two). Cachito will scan both of these files
(if present) for the name and version of your package. If Cachito fails to resolve either of those
values, the request will fail. More details about how (and to what extent) Cachito supports setup
files can be found in the docstrings of the corresponding classes in [pip.py][cachito-pip-py]:
`SetupPY`, `SetupCFG`.

Support for `setup.cfg` is more complete and allows greater flexibility when defining the package
version compared to `setup.py`. Nevertheless, both approaches are subject to some compromises on the
Cachito side. If Cachito cannot resolve the metadata it needs, you may unfortunately need to make
changes in your packaging code.

## User configuration

Cachito allows you to configure some aspects of a request that uses the `pip` package manager. You
can specify multiple subpackages within the source repository. For each subpackage, you can specify
custom locations for your requirements and build requirements file(s). Below is an example request
that uses all the available configuration options.

```json
{
  "repo": "https://github.com/example/repo.git",
  "ref": "8adec82cf2fc557d23a6dac2563ed25bb0f46b72",
  "pkg_managers": ["pip"],
  "packages": {
    "pip": [
      {
        "path": ".",
        "requirements_files": ["requirements.txt", "requirements-extras.txt"]
      },
      {
        "path": "some/subpackage",
        "build_requirements_files": ["requirements-build-only.txt"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

[setuptools-docs]: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html
[pep-518]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0518/
[setup-py-docs]: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#basic-use
[setup-cfg-docs]: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#configuring-setup-using-setup-cfg-files
[cachito-pip-py]: ../cachito/workers/pkg_managers/pip.py
